Init (#4)
RasaHQ/rasactl: README.md

# rasactl

rasactl deploys Rasa X / Enterprise on your local or remote Kubernetes cluster and manages Rasa X / Enterprise deployments.

## Features

- deploy Rasa X / Enterprise
- upgrade Rasa X / Enterprise
- stop/delete/start a running Rasa X / Enterprise deployment
- connect a local Rasa Server to Rasa X / Enterprise

> - mount a local Rasa project to Rasa X / Enterprise deployment

Author: Kinda, with Rasa X 1.0 the local mode that we know in the current form will be removed, instead of it you can run a Rasa X deployment locally that uses your local Rasa project/directory. 

The thing that happens underneath is that a local directory is mounted to a Rasa X deployment. I think maybe it'll be better to say something like "use a local Rasa project directory"?

    - [The `model list` command](#the-model-list-command)
    - [The `model tag` command](#the-model-tag-command)
    - [The `model upload` command](#the-model-upload-command)
  - [Examples of usage](#examples-of-usage)
    - [Run Rasa X / Enterprise with a local Rasa Server](#run-rasa-x--enterprise-with-a-local-rasa-server)
    - [Run Rasa X / Enterprise with mounted a local Rasa project](#run-rasa-x--enterprise-with-mounted-a-local-rasa-project)
    - [Upgrade Rasa X / Enterprise version](#upgrade-rasa-x--enterprise-version)
    - [Deploy Rasa X in one of the public cloud providers](#deploy-rasa-x-in-one-of-the-public-cloud-providers)
    - [Upload a model to Rasa X](#upload-a-model-to-rasa-x)
  - [Development](#development)
    - [How to run it?](#how-to-run-it)
    - [Kind cluster for developing purposes](#kind-cluster-for-developing-purposes)
    - [Deploy Rasa X with mounted a local path](#deploy-rasa-x-with-mounted-a-local-path)
    - [Open Rasa X in a web browser](#open-rasa-x-in-a-web-browser)
    - [Deploy Rasa X with mounted a local path and a custom Docker image](#deploy-rasa-x-with-mounted-a-local-path-and-a-custom-docker-image)
  - [License](#license)

> ## Prequimentes

Author: I think my spelling check in VSC did something odd 🙈

- Kubernetes cluster >= 1.14+
- kind (for local mode)

## Installation

### Linux / macOS

- Binary downloads of `rasactl` can be found on [the Releases page](https://github.com/rasahq/rasactl/releases/latest).

```text
$ curl -L https://github.com/RasaHQ/rasactl/releases/download/0.0.7/rasactl_0.0.7_darwin_amd64.tar.gz
$ tar -zxvf rasactl_0.0.7_darwin_amd64.tar.gz
$ cp rasactl_0.0.7_darwin_amd64/rasactl /usr/local/bin/
```

- Using `brew`

```text
$ brew tap rasahq/rasactl
$ brew install rasactl
```

## Commands

```text
Available Commands:

>   add         add existing Rasa X deployment

Author: This option can be used to add existing Rasa X deployment to "rasactl". If there is a Rasa X deployment that was deployed e.g. via helm and someone wants to use rasactl to manage it, first, you have to use the `add` option.

I'll add an example and description for it.

  auth        manage credentials for Rasa X / Enterprise

>   completion  generate the autocompletion script for the specified shell

Author: It's the same kind of completion that you can see in kubectl/helm.

  config      modify the configuration file
  connect     connect a component to Rasa X
  delete      delete Rasa X deployment
  help        Help about any command
  list        list deployments
  model       manage models for Rasa X / Enterprise
  open        open Rasa X in a web browser
  start       start a Rasa X deployment
  status      show deployment status
  stop        stop Rasa X deployment
  upgrade     upgrade Rasa X deployment
```

### The `start` command

The `start` creates a Rasa X deployment or starts stopped deployment if a given deployment already exists.

```text
Usage:
  rasactl start [DEPLOYMENT NAME] [flags]

Examples:

>   # Create a Rasa X deployment.

Author: Yes, it's exactly what it does.

  $ rasactl start

  # Create a Rasa X deployment with custom configuration, e.g the following configuration changes a Rasa X version.
  # All available values: https://github.com/RasaHQ/rasa-x-helm/blob/main/charts/rasa-x/values.yaml
  $ rasactl start --values-file custom-configuration.yaml

  # Create a Rasa X deployment with a defined password.
  $ rasactl start --rasa-x-password mypassword

  # Create a Rasa X deployment that uses a local Rasa project.
  # The command is executed in a Rasa project directory.

>   $ rasactl start --project

Author: The local mode aka `rasa x` will be removed in Rasa X 1.0. It's going to be a new way to run Rasa X that uses a local Rasa project. I'll add more descriptions and explanations.

      --rasa-x-chart-version string   a helm chart version to use
      --rasa-x-edge-release           use the latest edge release of Rasa X
      --rasa-x-password string        Rasa X password (default "rasaxlocal")
      --rasa-x-password-stdin         read the Rasa X password from stdin
      --rasa-x-release-name string    a helm release name to manage (default "rasa-x")
      --values-file string            absolute path to the values file
      --wait-timeout duration         time to wait for Rasa X to be ready (default 10m0s)

Global Flags:
      --config string       config file (default is $HOME/.rasactl.yaml)
      --debug               enable debug output
      --kubeconfig string   absolute path to the kubeconfig file (default "/Users/tczekajlo/.kube/config")
      --verbose             enable verbose output
```

### The `stop` command

The `stop` command stops a running Rasa X / Enterprise deployment.

### The `delete` command

The `delete` command deletes a Rasa X / Enterprise deployment.

You can use the `--prune` flag to remove a namespace where Rasa X deployment is located.

### The `list` command

> List all deployments.

Author: Technically you can add a deployment that wasn't started by rasactl. Maybe "List all deployments managed by rasactl"?

```text
$ rasactl list
CURRENT	NAME         	STATUS 	RASA PRODUCTION	RASA WORKER	ENTERPRISE	VERSION
       	hopeful-haibt	Running	2.8.1          	2.8.1      	inactive  	0.42.0
*      	vibrant-yalow	Running	2.8.1          	2.8.1      	inactive  	0.42.0
```

The `*` in the `CURRENT` field indicates a deployment that is used as default. It means that every time when you execute `rasactl` command without defining the deployment name, the deployment marked with `*` is used.

A deployment is marked as `CURRENT` if:

- in a current working directory is located the `.rasactl` file that includes a deployment name. The file is automatically created if you run the `rasactl start` command with the `--project` or `--project-path` flag
- there is only one deployment

> - you set the current deployment by using the `rasactl config use-deployment` command

Author: > Does this change what's found in the .rasactl file or not?
No, the `rasactl config use-deployment` command stores configuration in the `$HOME/.rasactl.yaml`. The order for looking for deployment to use looks like this:

1. The `.rasactl` file is located in the current working directory.
2. The default deployment grom the `rasactl.yaml` configuration file.
3. The deployment passed as an argument.

> - you set the current deployment by using the `rasactl config use-deployment` command

Author: I've added a section where I explain how it works.

### The `status` command

Show status of the deployment.

```text
$ rasactl status vibrant-yalow
Name:                   	vibrant-yalow
Status:                 	Running
URL:                    	http://vibrant-yalow.rasactl.localhost
Version:                	0.42.0
Enterprise:             	inactive
Rasa production version:	2.8.1
Rasa worker version:    	2.8.1
Project path:           	/home/ubuntu/test
```

### The `config use-deployment` command

Sets the current-deployment in the configuration file.

If you have multiple Rasa X deployments, and you are not in a project directory you have to explicitly define the deployment name during command execution.

> You can define a deployment that is used as a current one by using the `rasa config use-deployment` command.

Author: For now, it's the only subcommand for the `config` command. In the future, there will be more subcommands but for now there is only this one.

### The `connect rasa` command

> The connect command connects a component to Rasa X / Enterprise, e.g. you can connect a local Rasa Server to a deployment.

Author: > Does connect only work when typed as connect rasa ?
Yes, here is a similar situation as for the `config` option. For now, it includes only one sub-command but in the future, there might be other subcommands. 

For example, the `connect` command might include in the future something like `rasa-action-server` or other components.

```text
Connect Rasa OSS (Open Source Server) to Rasa X deployment.

The command prepares a configuration that's required to connect Rasa X deployment and run a local Rasa server.

It's required to have the 'rasa' command accessible by rasactl.

> The command works only if Rasa X deployment uses a local rasa project.

Author: The `rasactl connect rasa` runs/connect only a local Rasa Server, it executes the `rasa run` command on your local machine with an additional configuration that allows connecting a local rasa server to a Rasa X deployment.

If you want to connect some externally running Rasa Server then you have to pass configuration via the values file, the same as you do this currently via helm.

Is it a bit clearer now?

Usage:
  rasactl connect rasa [DEPLOYMENT NAME] [flags]

Examples:
  # Connect Rasa Server to Rasa X deployment.
  $ rasactl connect rasa

  # Run a saparate rasa server for the Rasa X worker environment.
  $ rasactl connect rasa --run-saparate-worker

  # Pass extra arguments to rasa server.
  $ rasactl connect rasa --extra-args="--debug"

Flags:
      --extra-args strings    extra arguments for Rasa server
  -h, --help                  help for rasa
  -p, --port int              port to run the Rasa server at (default 5005)
      --run-saparate-worker   runs a separate Rasa server for the worker environment

Global Flags:
      --config string       config file (default is $HOME/.rasactl.yaml)
      --debug               enable debug output
      --kubeconfig string   absolute path to the kubeconfig file (default "/Users/tczekajlo/.kube/config")
      --verbose             enable verbose output
```

### The `auth login` command

Log in to Rasa X / Enterprise. It stores credentials in an external credentials store, such as the native keychain of the operating system.

*  Apple macOS Keychain Access for macOS
*  pass for Linux

> *  Microsoft Windows Credential Manager for Windows

Author: > Are these default-and-only i.e. "if on apple, Keychain Access is used"?

Yes, for a given OS there is only one default.

> *  Microsoft Windows Credential Manager for Windows

Author: I've added changes to make it clearer.

There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.

gpg: directory '/home/ubuntu/.gnupg' created
gpg: keybox '/home/ubuntu/.gnupg/pubring.kbx' created
Note: Use "gpg --full-generate-key" for a full featured key generation dialog.

GnuPG needs to construct a user ID to identify your key.

Real name: rasactl
Email address:
You selected this USER-ID:
    "rasactl"

Change (N)ame, (E)mail, or (O)kay/(Q)uit? O
[...]
public and secret key created and signed.
```

3. Init `pass`.

```text
$ pass init rasactl
mkdir: created directory '/home/ubuntu/.password-store/'
Password store initialized for rasactl
```

Now you can use `rasactl auth` on Linux.

```text
$ rasactl ls
CURRENT	NAME             	STATUS 	RASA PRODUCTION	RASA WORKER	ENTERPRISE	VERSION
       	wonderful-gagarin	Running	2.8.1          	2.8.1      	inactive  	0.42.0
$ rasactl auth login wonderful-gagarin
Username: me
Password:
Successfully logged.
```

***Troubleshooting*** If you see `Error: exit status 2: gpg: decryption failed: No secret key` error you should export the following environment variable `export GPG_TTY="$(tty)"`.

### The `auth logout` command

> Removes access credentials for an account.

Author: No, only for the currently active. I mean it logout you only for a given deployment that is defined in configuration/passed as argument.

> Removes access credentials for an account.

Reviewer: Looks like those haven't made it in yet

│                                        │
│    URL: http://35.184.183.164:30012    │
│    Rasa X version: 0.42.0              │
│    Rasa X password: rasaxlocal         │
│                                        │
╰────────────────────────────────────────╯
```

***Important!*** Rasa X deployment will be exposed to the public on one of the service node port (`30000-30100`). Remember to add a rule to firewall configuration that allows for access to the Rasa X deployment.

### Upload a model to Rasa X

The following example shows how to download an existing model and upload it via `rasactl`.

1. Download a model.

```text
$ curl -L https://github.com/RasaHQ/rasa-x-demo/blob/master/models/model.tar.gz?raw=true --output model.tar.gz
[...]
```

2. Upload the download model to Rasa X.

```text
$ rasactl model upload [deployment name] model.tar.gz

Successfully uploaded.
```

You can use the `rasa model list` command to list all available models, e.g

```text
$ rasactl model list [deployment name]
NAME 	VERSION	COMPATIBLE	TAGS	HASH                            	TRAINED AT
model	2.8.2  	true      	none	093dfaad610d330e5f36e6d7dc104d86	05 Aug 21 13:16 UTC

> ```

Author: Hmm, actually, it's an example of usage. I guess it makes more sense to keep all examples in one section?

# rasactl

rasactl deploys Rasa X / Enterprise on your local or remote Kubernetes cluster and manages Rasa X / Enterprise deployments.

## Features

- deploy Rasa X / Enterprise

  You can use `rasactl` to deploy Rasa X / Enterprise on your local machine or a VM in one of the major cloud providers.

  (check the [Prerequisites](#Prerequisites) section)

- upgrade Rasa X / Enterprise

  Upgrade/change configuration for an existing Rasa X deployment.

- stop/delete/start a running Rasa X / Enterprise deployment

>   Manage the lifecycle of your deployment, you can stop, delete or start one of the Rasa X deployments managed by `rasactl`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Manage the lifecycle of your deployment: you can stop, delete or start one of the Rasa X deployments managed by `rasactl`.
```

- connect a local Rasa Server to Rasa X / Enterprise

>   You can use your local Rasa Open Source Server along with Rasa X / Enterprise. The `rasactl` will prepare configuration for Rasa OSS and Rasa X and run Rasa Server on your local machine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  You can use your local Rasa Open Source server along with Rasa X / Enterprise. `rasactl` will prepare configuration for Rasa OSS and Rasa X and run the Rasa Open Source server on your local machine.
```

  (requires `kind` and Rasa OSS installed locally)

- use a local Rasa project along Rasa X / Enterprise deployment

  Use your local Rasa project along with Rasa X / Enterprise deployment. The `rasaxctl` provides an easy way to use your local Rasa project along with Rasa X / Enterprise.

>   It's something that might be known as "local mode" in the older Rasa X version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  This setup was previously referred to as "local mode" in older Rasa X versions.
```

    - [The `model upload` command](#the-model-upload-command)
  - [Examples of usage](#examples-of-usage)
    - [Run Rasa X / Enterprise with a local Rasa Server](#run-rasa-x--enterprise-with-a-local-rasa-server)
    - [Run Rasa X / Enterprise with mounted a local Rasa project](#run-rasa-x--enterprise-with-mounted-a-local-rasa-project)
    - [Upgrade Rasa X / Enterprise version](#upgrade-rasa-x--enterprise-version)
    - [Deploy Rasa X in one of the public cloud providers](#deploy-rasa-x-in-one-of-the-public-cloud-providers)
    - [Upload a model to Rasa X](#upload-a-model-to-rasa-x)
  - [Development](#development)
    - [How to run it?](#how-to-run-it)
    - [Kind cluster for developing purposes](#kind-cluster-for-developing-purposes)
    - [Deploy Rasa X with mounted a local path](#deploy-rasa-x-with-mounted-a-local-path)
    - [Open Rasa X in a web browser](#open-rasa-x-in-a-web-browser)
    - [Deploy Rasa X with mounted a local path and a custom Docker image](#deploy-rasa-x-with-mounted-a-local-path-and-a-custom-docker-image)
  - [License](#license)

## Prerequisites

- Kubernetes cluster >= 1.14+

   or

- kind (for local mode)

## Installation

### Linux / macOS

> - Binary downloads of `rasactl` can be found on [the Releases page](https://github.com/rasahq/rasactl/releases/latest).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Binary downloads of `rasactl` can be found on [the Releases page](https://github.com/rasahq/rasactl/releases/latest). You can manually install rasactl by coping the binary into your `bin`:
```

```text
$ curl -L https://github.com/RasaHQ/rasactl/releases/download/0.0.7/rasactl_0.0.7_darwin_amd64.tar.gz
$ tar -zxvf rasactl_0.0.7_darwin_amd64.tar.gz
$ cp rasactl_0.0.7_darwin_amd64/rasactl /usr/local/bin/
```

> - Using `brew`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You can also install via `brew`:
```

```text
$ brew tap rasahq/rasactl
$ brew install rasactl
```

## Before you start

Below you can find several things that are good to know and keep in mind when you use `rasactl`.

> - `rasactl` executes an operation always only for a given deployment. The order in which `rasactl` determine a deployment to use:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It is possible to configure multiple deployments with `rasactl`. A `rasactl` command will always execute an operation on a single deployment. Here is the order in which `rasactl` determines which deployment to use:
```

>   1. A deployment name passed as an argument.

Reviewer: Which argument?

Author: as an argument passed in the CLI, I added more description to make it clear.

Reviewer: thanks! i figured it out later by seeing the Usage sections, but thought it could be clearer up here

>   2. The `rasactl` checks if a `.rasactl` file exists in a current working directory, if yes, then a deployment defined in the file is used. The `.rasactl` file is created automatically when the `rasactl start --project` command is executed.
>   3. The `rasactl` checks if a default deployment is configured in the `rasactl.yaml` configuration file, if yes, then the default deployment is used. The default deployment can be set by using the `rasactl config use-deployment` command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  2. `rasactl` checks if a `.rasactl` file exists in a current working directory. If so, the deployment defined in the file is used. This `.rasactl` file is created automatically when the `rasactl start --project` command is executed.
  3. `rasactl` checks if a default deployment is configured in the `rasactl.yaml` configuration file, if yes, then the default deployment is used. The default deployment can be set by using the `rasactl config use-deployment` command.
```

  4. If there is only one deployment, then it's used.

  You can use the [`rasactl list`](#the-list-command) command to check which deployment is used as the current one.

>   The `rasactl delete` command always requires explicitly pass a deployment name as an argument.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The `rasactl delete` command requires explicitly passing a deployment name as an argument.
```
Again, an example with the argument would be helpful here :)

- `rasactl` uses the [`rasa-x-helm`](https://github.com/RasaHQ/rasa-x-helm) chart to deploy Rasa X / Enterprise.

> - `rasactl` deploys Rasa X / Enterprise without Rasa Open Source Server. It's up to you to connect Rasa OSS with Rasa X / Enterprise deployment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `rasactl` deploys Rasa X / Enterprise without a Rasa Open Source server. It's up to you to connect Rasa OSS with Rasa X / Enterprise deployment.
```
I would add links to the section here about "You can do this by <connecting to an existing one> or <configuring a local project> " etc

  model       manage models for Rasa X / Enterprise
  open        open Rasa X in a web browser
  start       start a Rasa X deployment
  status      show deployment status
  stop        stop Rasa X deployment
  upgrade     upgrade Rasa X deployment
```

### The `add` command

Adds existing Rasa X deployment to rasactl.

If you already have a Rasa X deployment that uses the rasa-x-helm chart you can add the deployment and manage it by rasactl.

```text
Usage:
  rasactl add NAMESPACE [flags]
```

```text
Examples:
  # Add a Rasa X deployment that is deployed in the 'my-test' namespace.
  $ rasactl add my-test

  # Add a Rasa X deployment that is deployed in the 'my-test' namespace and
  # a helm release name for the deployment is 'rasa-x-example'.
  $ rasactl add my-test --rasa-x-release-name rasa-x-example
```

```text
Flags:
  -h, --help                         help for add
      --rasa-x-release-name string   a helm release name to manage (default "rasa-x")
```

### The `start` command

The `start` command creates a Rasa X deployment or starts a stopped deployment if a given deployment already exists.

```text
Usage:
  rasactl start [DEPLOYMENT-NAME] [flags]

```

```text

> Examples:

Reviewer: These are awesome! :)

```

```text
Flags:
  -d, --details   show detailed information, such as running pods, helm chart status
  -h, --help      help for status
```

Example output:

```text
$ rasactl status vibrant-yalow
Name:                   	vibrant-yalow
Status:                 	Running
URL:                    	http://vibrant-yalow.rasactl.localhost
Version:                	0.42.0
Enterprise:             	inactive
Rasa production version:	2.8.1
Rasa worker version:    	2.8.1
Project path:           	/home/ubuntu/test
```

### The `config use-deployment` command

Sets the current-deployment in the configuration file.

If you have multiple Rasa X deployments, and you are not in a project directory you have to explicitly define the deployment name during command execution.
You can define a deployment that is used as a current one by using the `rasa config use-deployment` command.

```text
Usage:
  rasactl config use-deployment DEPLOYMENT-NAME [flags]
```

```text
Examples:
  # Set the 'example' deployment as the current deployment.
  $ rasactl config use-deployment example
```

```text
Flags:
  -h, --help   help for use-deployment
```

### The `connect rasa` command

> Connect Rasa OSS (Open Source Server) to Rasa X deployment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run a local Rasa Open Source server and connect it to a Rasa X deployment.
```

The command prepares a configuration that's required to connect Rasa X deployment and run a local Rasa server.

It's required to have the 'rasa' command accessible by rasactl.

> The command works only if Rasa X deployment runs on a local Kubernetes cluster runs on kind.

Reviewer: should be "runs on kind", right? or "on a local Kubernetes cluster managed with `kind`"?

Author: The latter, technically `kind` only set up the cluster, it doesn't do anything extra.

Reviewer: ok! I think "runs on a local Kubernetes cluster runs on kind" looked like a typo to me so i was a bit confused 😄

Author: I've updated it.

```text
Usage:
  rasactl model list [DEPLOYMENT-NAME] [flags]

Aliases:
  list, ls
```

```text
Examples:
  # List all models (use the currently active deployment).
  $ rasactl model list

  # List all models for the 'my-deployment' deployment.
  $ rasactl model list my-deployment
```

```text
Flags:
  -h, --help   help for list
```

### The `model tag` command

Create a tag and assign it to a given model.

Rasa Enterprise allows multiple versions of an assistant to be run simultaneously and served to different users. By default, two environments are defined:

- production
- worker

 If you want to activate a model you have to tag it as 'production'.

 Learn more [here](https://rasa.com/docs/rasa-x/enterprise/deployment-environments/).

```text
Usage:
  rasactl model tag [DEPLOYMENT-NAME] MODEL-NAME TAG [flags]
```

```text
Examples:
  # Tag the 'my-model' model as 'production' (use the currently active deployment)
  $ rasactl model tag my-model production

  # Tag the 'my-model' with the 'test' tag within the 'my-deployment' deployment.
  $ rasactl model tag my-deployment my-model test
```

```text
Flags:
  -h, --help   help for tag
```

> ### The `model upload` command

Reviewer: This should be up with the other model commands

Author: hmm, it is, no?

Reviewer: ah my bad, i mixed it up with the `### Upload a model to Rasa X` usage command!

# rasactl

> rasactl deploys Rasa X / Enterprise on your local or remote Kubernetes cluster and manages Rasa X / Enterprise deployments.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`rasactl` deploys Rasa X / Enterprise on your local or remote Kubernetes cluster and manages Rasa X / Enterprise deployments.
```
